---
layout: default
title: Targets
---

# Product Outcome Targets

In the previous post on **[Team-Based Product Outcomes](/2022/01/26/team-based-product-outcomes)**, we outlined the four criteria for a good outcome definition, which are **The Directional Component**, **The Primary Metric**, **The Target**, and **The UOM**.

In this post we'll dive more into the Target and talk about how to make targets more concrete and trackable.

### <a name="tracking-metrics">Tracking Metrics</a>

Tracking metrics are metrics we can collect that help us determine if we are making progress towards our target.  They usually take the form of metrics that give us an indication in the movement of a slice of the Target metric.

Example:

In our previous post we set up a hypothetical outcome to `Increase the number of new user sign-ups by 50% YoY`.  In this scenario, the Target is 50%.  There are a number of indicators that might tell us that the change in behavior that we are looking for (increased sign-ups) is moving in the right direction.  They might be:

- Number of people visiting the sign-up page
- Number of people that open marketing emails that lead to a sign-up landing page
- Number of people that fill out a form to get access to a demo

We might have a hypothesis that an increase in any of these metrics would correlate with a positive move towards our target.  It is useful to track all of these metrics, and examine their movement in relation to our Target periodically to help us understand which of them are better predictors of success in reaching our target.

---

### <a name="mapping-targets-to-times">Mapping Targets to Times</a>

A critical component of outcome tracking is mapping Targets to Times (also known as the UOM).  Without a clear amount of time where we expect to see a difference in behavior, it it very difficult to prioritize what we want to work on, and know if we are moving in the right direction.

Getting commitment on pinning a Target to a Time can be challenging.  If you ever want to spook a development team, just ask them when something is going ot be ready.  This is a healthy and normal reaction because software development and delivery is an inherently ambiguous endeavor.  When planning work on a system, it is impossible to know every detail of what will need to be done upfront, and there will always be hidden challenges that present themselves as the work is being done.

The discomfort that teams have in committing to deadlines, however, is one of the reasons that outcome-based delivery is a powerful paradigm.  We are no longer asking teams to commit to a specific deadline for a specific set of features.  Rather we are asking them to deliver a change in behavior within a time frame.  How that change in behavior is delivered is entirely up to the team, and can change during the process.  If a team goes down a path and hits a roadblock in a particular approach, no problem.  The team can shift gears, hypothesize a new way to impact the target, and apply what they learned from the last attempt in a new way.

There will be times that targets cannot be hit in the Time period that was originally negotiated.  We'll deal with that it the following section ***[Identifying and Communicating Risks](#identifying-and-communicating-risks)***.

When negotiating Times with the teams, there are a few things to ask:

- Are all outcomes expected to be delivered at the same time (i.e. are all outcomes for the entire year?)
- Are outcomes sequenced, either due to dependencies or resource constraints?
- What is the expected delivery pattern (e.g. linear, stepped, exponential).  More on this in ***[Tracking Progress to Targets](#tracking-progress-to-targets)

Some Targets may take an entire year to achieve.  In those cases it makes sense to set Targets for each quarter so we can have a more fine-grained understanding of progress.  Other Targets may be achievable in a single Quarter.  If a Target can be achieved in less than a Quarter, it's worth asking if our Target is ambitious enough. 

---

### <a name="tracking-progress-to-targets">Tracking Progress to Targets</a>

Once Targets are set and aligned with Times, and we have our Tracking Metrics that help us understand if we are moving in the right direction, we need to set up a system to collect and visualize our metrics, so we can determine over time if we are making progress on a scale that will allow us to meet (or exceed!) our target.

One of the first things we need to understand about our targets is the expected delivery pattern of the metrics.  

If we expect to make steady progress on a Target, and expect to see results on a regular basis, we would classify that as a *linear* delivery pattern.  In this pattern, we would expect our progress towards our target to move steadily in one direction without long periods of no activity or large jumps at regular intervals.  This delivery pattern is the lowest risk, as any disruption to the regular movement of the metrics should be an indicator to the team that we need to reexamine our hypothesis.

If we expect to regularly deliver large changes, with regular intervals of no change in between, we would classify that as a *stepped* delivery pattern.  Stepped delivery patterns can align well with agile/scrum development teams, as they tend to deliver functionality at regular intervals.  It should be obvious that changes in behavior in a stepped delivery pattern lag actual delivery of the functionality that is expected to change the behavior.  Understanding adoption rates of new functionality should help us understand what the lag period should look like.  This pattern is also low risk, as steps should occur at regular intervals, but is slightly higher risk than linear since we have a step period and a lag period in which we could continue moving in the wrong direction without a clear signal that we should change strategy.

If we expect to need to do a large amount of work before we see any impact on our Target, we would classify this as exponential delivery.  Exponential delivery, when graphed against the metric, has the classic hockey stick characteristic where there is little or no movement in the target for a long period of time, and then the Target moves dramatically towards our goal in a short amount oif time.  This is clearly the highest risk delivery method, as we may spend an entire quarter (or more) working on our hypothesis without a clear indication of impact.  There are some situations where big, system-level changes are necessary which would necessitate using this delivery method, but they should be avoided if possible. 

It is generally a good idea to have a central place to track our metrics and roll them up to our Targets.  Automated dashboards are great, but a simple spreadsheet will work nicely.  It's important to have a single source of truth for tracking so that everyone can have a clear, easily accessible place to understand progress.

---

### <a name="identifying-and-communicating-risks">Identifying and Communicating Risks</a>


Part of setting up team outcomes is negotiating with the team how often we should examine our metrics to understand if we are on pace, or if we need to examine alternatives.  Your team may want to meet regularly to communicate progress and discuss if we think we are still on track.  SOme teams may set a deviation from progress that triggers a synchronous meeting to understand the deviation, but may otherwise use the metrics and target asynchronously to understand progress.

No matter how well thought out our Targets, how carefully we plan our Times, or how many Tracking Metrics we put in place to understand our progress, there will be times when we realize we won't hit our Target within the given Time.  That's Ok.  It's part of software delivery.

What we need to think about in these situations is:

- Does our tracking tell us we are close, or very far away?
- Do we have time to change course and try another approach?
- What is the impact to the business if we don't make our Target?
- Can more resources/tighter focus be brought to the outcome in order to achieve our target?
- Is there a systemic reason why we are not making the anticipated progress?

These questions can provide a powerful way to understand priority, process, team dynamics and system complexity.  As long as we are learning from the situation and refining our Targets accordingly, this is a healthy exercise, not a cause for blame or recriminations.

If we learn that we will not hit our targets, and decide as a team to modify them, it is important to do this as soon as possible.  It is crucial that the changes, and the reasons for the change, are communicated to stakeholders so they can make cny changes in their communications to the broader organization that are necessary.  This is especially important when communicating with Marketing and Sales, who often are communicating timelines with external stakeholders.

The quicker changes are identified and communicated, the easier the communication is.  Waiting until the end of Q4 to identify that a year-long outcome target will not be achieved is a difficult change to make, and can be disruptive to the team and the broader organization.

---

That's it for Targets.  In the next post we will discuss Cadences that enable creation, tracking and refinement of outcomes.