---
layout: default
title: Cadences
---

# Product Outcome Cadences

In the previous post on **[Product Outcome Targets](/2022/01/28/targets)**, we talked about Targets and how we track progress, map them to time periods, and identify and communicate risk.

In this post we'll delve into the Cadences that we can set up to ensure that we are meeting frequently enough to ensure we are on target, but not so frequently that we are sitting on endless planning meetings.

There are four Cadences that we are concerned with at different levels of the organization that we are working in: **Department Outcome Planning**, **Team Outcome Planning and Refinement**, **Team Outcome Tracking**, and **Leadership Sync**. 

---

### <a name="department-outcome-planning-cadence">Department Outcome Planning Cadence</a>

Department Outcome Planning helps us to understand the outcomes that our department can impact, usually across multiple teams within the department.

Department outcome planning generally has a longer cadence than team planning cadences, as departmental goals tend to change less frequently than team level outcomes.  A general starting point for determining Department outcome planning cadences is to have a yearly kick-off to identify the outcomes the department plans to affect in the coming year, and then plan to revisit them on a quarterly basis to see if refinement is necessary.  

When refining outcomes, the overall outcome should either be cancelled, or refinement should be constrained to *either* the Target or the UOM.  Make as few changes as possible, based on the best available data, and try to limit changes to one variable at a time.  

---

### <a name="team-planning-and-refinement-cadence">Team Planning and Refinement Cadence</a>

Team planning and refinement cadences are shorter than organizational cadences, due to the finer grain of available data at the team level, and the ability to see small changes by being closer to the work.  A good starting place for team planning and refinement is to start with a monthly session to examine the trajectory of the tracking metrics of the outcome, and discuss the teams perspective on what, if any, effect this might have on outcomes.  

The planning and refinement session should be separate from the Team Outcome Tracking cadence, as the purpose of the sessions is different.  The outcome tracking sessions are meant to identify pace and clear blocks, which are tactical operations.  The planning and refinement sessions are meant to be taken at a higher level and serve as a strategy session with the team to synthesize the aggregate of the tracking sessions, and refine any targets that may be out of alignment due to factors of the delivery life cycle.

---

### <a name="team-outcome-tracking-cadence">Team Outcome Tracking Cadence</a>

Team outcome tracking cadences are necessarily shorter than team planning and refinement cadences, since the output of the tracking sessions are an input to the planning and refinement sessions.  A good starting point for team outcome tracking cadences is either weekly or bi-weekly.  Tracking sessions should be focussed on examining the tracking metrics for the outcome, in combination with the expected delivery pattern (linear, stepped, exponential) of the outcome to determine if the team is on pace to achieve the goal.

This session should include conversations about any new priority items that have been introduced to the team since the last session that might impact their ability to deliver the outcomes they have committed to.  This is an opportunity for departmental leadership to understand and clear blocks for the team.

The outcome tracking meetings should start as synchronous sessions, in order to facilitate communication patterns and establish norms for the sessions.  Once norms have been achieved and a flow has been established, sessions may transition to asynchronous if the following criteria are met:

- Metric Collection is either automated or is ingrained in the team so that progress is visible for all invested parties
- Graphs of progress are available in a centralized place that everyone has access to
- Steady progress, in character with the delivery pattern, is being made in the desired direction of the outcome

Linear and stepped delivery patterns are good candidates for asynchronous sessions, as their progress is predictable, and should be clear from a graph of the tracking metrics.  Outcomes with exponential delivery patterns are less suitable candidates for asynchronous sessions, as their delivery is less predictable, and the risk of these kinds of outcomes is higher.  When in doubt it is better to have a synchronous meeting and ensure that all available information is being exchanged, rather than miss out on a subtle detail that might only be surfaced through discussion and probing questions.

---

### <a name="leadership-cadence">Leadership Cadence</a>

Leadership should be informed of outcome tracking progress and refinement on a regular basis to prevent surprises and provide leadership with the ability to adjust plans and communications, especially with different parts of the organization, in a timely manner.

As with team outcome tracking, leadership syncs should start synchronously, and as time goes on and artifacts are generated that represent the state of the organizations outcomes, it may move to being a mix of asynchronous updates with less frequent, regular synchronous sessions to allow leadership to ask questions and provide new context.

The cadence for leadership syncs is up to leadership more than to the department, based on the needs of the leadership group, but advocating for a bi-weekly sync to begin is a good place to start.

When engaging with leadership to communicate progress to outcomes, a hierarchical presentation of state is a good way to connect overall business goals with lower-level team activities.  Starting with the business outcomes the department is attempting to impact, accompanied with a strategic view of how the department is going to attempt to make an impact, is a natural lead-in to the fine grained team outcomes that support the business.  This type of presentation helps senior leadership connect the goals of the business with the goals of the department, and the teams.

---

### <a name="feedback-loops">Feedback Loops</a>

The cadences outlined above should have well-thought out feedback loops incorporated into them in order to accommodate and support change.  Things change within an organization, and new information needs to be synthesized as soon as possible to prevent going too far down a path that may no longer be possible or desirable.

There are business activities external to the team that may cause a change in strategy at the department or team level such as:

- Acquisition of a technology that is a direct analog of the department or team's product
- A key leadership change at the organization, department or team level
- A change in market conditions that require a pivot in product strategy

There are obviously many more conditions which might trigger a change in strategy and direction that are external to the team, however within the team some conditions that might trigger a feedback loop that would cause a change in session cadence might be:

- Identification of a tracking metric pattern that indicate that an outcome will not be met
- A breakthrough that accelerates the ability to achieve an outcome
- A cross-team event that places a block in the way of another team to achieve their outcome

In any of these scenarios it may become necessary to make changes to the regular cadences that have been established.  Some examples of this might be:

- Switching from asynchronous to synchronous sessions to create tighter alignment
- Changing cadences to be more frequent in order to more closely track changes to the environment
- Having an off-schedule planning and refinement session to modify plans and communicate changes

What's important is to use the data that is being collected across the organization, department, and teams to modify cadences as necessary, based on new information.

---

That's it for Cadences.  In the next post we'll discuss Work Stream and Process as a way to think about how we plan and deliver work towards outcomes.